Okay. He was the first captain, they call it, at
West Point, which is the parallel to the cadet
colonel at A&M. He was one of the youngest colonels
promoted in World War II, and very young brigadier
general, all that, very outstanding all the way.
Commanded the division at a young age, and
commanded a corps. I think that General
Westmoreland was a fine commander. I think that
few people would have done it much differently or
any better than he did his job that he was assigned.
The mission he was given, I simply think he was
given the wrong mission. I think he was not ever
given an objective, a realistic objective. The
national leadership never defined an objective
to win the Vietnam War. General Westmoreland,
like a good soldier, accepted his instructions
and carried them out the best he could. I, in
retrospect, have often thought since what
difference might have been made if he and he must
have realized that we couldn't win under the rules
he was required to operate under what would have
been the result if he'd said give me a definitive
objective for winning this war that would win this
war or give me new orders get me out of here
I think it would have made a difference now I'm not
saying that I feel he should have done that I don't
know what I would have done under these
circumstances. Sure. If you're a good soldier and
think you can carry out the instructions that have
been given you, unless you violently disagree
with those instructions, you do the best you can
with them. Sure. If you violently disagree and
can't resolve the difference with your directing
authority, then you resign. You quit. Ask to be
moved. Transfer. Now, you dealt with him on a
weekly basis. What kind of person was he? Well, he
was a personable man. He was intense in the sense
that he was always thinking of the mission. He was
always trying to be helpful. He never showed
discouragement to me or to us. He may have been
discouraged at times. We weren't discouraged. We
won all our battles, and I think it's safe to say
that the American forces won their major battles.
There's a lot of talk of the Tet Offensive of 68. I
wasn't there at that time, but the enemy didn't win
that battle. But of course we lost the war. But
General Westmoreland was, he was basically good
to work for and And we appreciated seeing him when
he'd come around. He always had something
cheerful or helpful to say. What did you think of
him when you sat down and thought of him? I think
that they had great respect for him. Because I
worked with General Westmoreland after he and I
came back from Vietnam. I was chief of legislative
liaison for the Department of the Army, and I saw a
great deal more of him then. And I've seen him
several times since he retired. And I commented to
him, looking back not so much on his time in the
Vietnam War, but his problem in being chief of
staff of the army when the national resolve was
melting and the problems were mounting in the army
as a result of the lack of resolve to prosecute that
war.
I felt, and I told him, I thought he'd had the
toughest job as Chief of Staff of the Army as any
Chief of Staff ever had, with the possible
exception of the Civil War Chiefs of Staff. You
recall that during that period that he was Chief of
Staff, for example,
the draft was discontinued, which is evidence of
the discontent within the population. Well,
that's taking a means away from the Army, a
resource away from the Army. The Congress, which
at the time when I first became chief legislative
liaison, I would say that 80% of the members of
Congress in 1968
were resolved to prosecute that Vietnam War. I
would say that by the end of 1970, they were a
minority. So the whole thing was crumbling. It was
inevitable we had to just move out. We had to give
up. That's what happened. What about the
relations with your Vietnamese counterparts?
I'm glad you asked that, because it's occurred to
me we should weave this in. We worked closely with a
particular division, the 22nd Division. It had
two commanders, different commanders, while I
was there in that year and a half. We, at times,
worked with other divisions.
To generalize a little bit here, when we arrived
there, they were pretty well whipped, to some
degree demoralized. I think
they've had a lot of experience in combat. They've
been fighting for a long, long time. But they never
really lost
their defensive mentality. We did work side by
side in a number of operations, and we did
encourage them to do more of the operations,
offensive operations, we never, at least the ones
I saw, never got the Vietnamese units in an
offensive frame of mind. I don't know how this
should have been balanced out or how it could have
been balanced out, but as a result, initially the
year and a half I was there, and the front year and a
half of this after the buildup,
We just took it upon ourselves to defeat the enemy.
And we did not push these Vietnamese enough into
the offensive operations. I think their greatest
weakness was one that we never really came to
correct. Their greatest weakness was their
ability to sustain themselves in the field. In
other words, a logistics, lack of logistical
know-how and capabilities. And of course, that is
very essential. Sure. Arvin didn't have that
ability. They just didn't have that ability. And
it was never developed. Now, why or how it could
have been done better, I don't know. While you're
there
basically to conduct combat operations, how can
you there at the same time retrain these divisions
of the Vietnamese effectively. Perhaps there's
been a lot of criticism that we didn't give them a
greater role. Well, to give them the greater role,
you'd have to prepare them for a greater role. That
was never really accomplished. And I suppose a
part of that was
overall resources and capability to support
logistically. because we were strained in
supplying that operation over there
logistically from our shores here. So, you know,
if you put more over to the Vietnamese, are the
American troops going to get enough? You see what I
mean? Sure. Well, when you went out on a maneuver,
let's say you were going to attack a position,
would you take the urban troops with you or would
you just do it on your own? Well, we would do it on our
own. combined with them in an operation, it would
be they'd have their area of operation and we would
have ours. And then your air mobile would take care
of both? We would often support them with airlift
jets, with aircraft. Or they'd have a mission that
was compatible with their capabilities, you see.
And I must add that they fought some very
effective, some good battles I don't remember the
figures, but I recall two or three real successful
fights that that particular division had, but it
wasn't often they really got engaged like that.
For the most part, they'd sort of sit back at the
base? They tended to protect their territory and
not gather up a concentration of force to go and
conduct an offensive operation of any duration.
How about the officers? How'd you get along with
the Airmen officers? Oh, we got along well with
them, and some of them were extremely capable
officers. After all, remember the experience
they've had now, and that they had had. For
example, the second division commander that I
knew in this particular division was a very young
man and very bright and had a very positive command
presence. Seemed to be very much respected by his
troops, and a capable leader, and a good
tactician. Of course, a number of them were
trained in our schools, and a lot of them were
trained in the school experience. But again, they
were largely defending themselves. That's my
picture of it. Of course, a lot of people have
complained about the corruption in Vietnam.
Did you find any of this, any experience with that
whatsoever? I had no direct knowledge of that.
I've heard the same thing. I've heard them over
there. I
would like to know what the direct evidence might
be, but I think it's safe to say that
It has been the long, long, it's been the custom and
tradition in the oriental societies that persons
in authority
are going, it's almost, if I understand it
correctly, it's almost an accepted practice that
everyone in authority is a percentage man. I've
heard it said, and I can't prove this, that if an
individual becomes comes in a position of
authority in an oriental society, and he has a
friend who wants a job and he gets him a job, that
friend expects that he should be rewarded. And so
he rewards him.
If you're in the army and you procure from a source,
something like supplies, let's say, If I
understand the tradition correctly, and I never
saw this, I've never seen it written, then it's
sort of common that there is a consideration
because, you know, I came to you. I don't know.
Because you didn't see it. I didn't see it. I don't
know. I've heard these things. But what I'm saying
is it's more a part of the system than it is...
identifying with a corrupt Vietnamese army. It's
more a part of the culture. Okay, would you compare
the quality of the North Vietnamese Army with the
American Army, just the soldiers? Well, the North
Vietnamese soldier individually is a very good
soldier. In fact, his small units, I'm talking
about squads and platoons, fought very well. I
don't believe they ever defeated a company-sized
unit of ours or greater. So you've got to say they
don't compare at the higher level. And I don't want
to take any of the credit from that individual
Vietnamese soldier, because he usually operated
with pretty sparse supplies. And he wasn't too
well equipped. He had a good rifle, the infantry
soldier did. and they were well disciplined. I
don't want to take away from that either, but they
have a form of discipline that, of course, we have,
I think, acceptable discipline, but I refer to
theirs as the pistol discipline. But you have to
kind of respect any system that will maintain a
discipline in those conditions. Well, the pistol
discipline is, as far as I know, an officer in
charge has got the authority of his pistol if he
needs that. That's what I was referring to. Okay.
You said that most of your combat was with the North
Vietnamese Army. What about the Viet Cong, the
indigenous South Vietnamese who were
communist-bound? The Viet Cong, we did have
contact with them on a number of occasions because
they had a very well-known regiment that was
operating in the area that we were in, and of
course, it's hard to visualize the vastness of
this area and the fire station, and so when you
wonder how A regiment can survive all the attacks
that we made upon them, but part of their mission
was survival, of course, because they wanted to
choose the moment and type of operation they might
conduct to hurt us, disrupt us, keep the system
disrupted. But they seemed to be good soldiers.
Again, they were very effective in avoiding
destruction, although I think we had them and...
The two Vietnamese divisions in our area, North
Vietnamese division, we had them at times,
according to the intelligence we got, in very,
very poor strength. They lost a lot of people, but
they always got replaced.
Was there a lot of hatred between the American
soldier and the Vietnamese? I mean, were there?
Which Vietnamese? The North or the South? I mean,
the North Vietnamese. The North Vietnamese? Oh, I
think so. I think it's naturally a hatred of the
enemy. Was it as bad as between the Americans and
the Japanese? I don't believe so. I don't believe
it was. Because, well, I just don't think it was.
The Japanese, you know, started out their war to
not take prisoners and not to be taken in. Well,
what about the idea of Americans not being taken
prisoner by the North Vietnamese or the Viet Cong?
We had quite a number taken. I say we, the armed
American forces, compared to the war against the
Japanese. Now in our division, I think we could
count them probably on one or two hands that we lost
the prisoner status.
And it usually was a case of being overrun, small
unit. Did they ever return? I never knew of them. I
never knew of the recovery or return. I would say we
could count on one hand. I remember one incident
where we lost two men. It's when a position was
overrun at night. And there were two or three
isolated incidents of where we thought they were
taken prisoner. It's awfully hard to tell once you
lose a man whether he was taken prisoner or just
taken off and killed or, you know, what. Whether he
survived prisoner status is what I'm saying.
Sure, absolutely. What about the Viet Cong were
well known in South Vietnam for the amount of
terrorism against government officials in the
small villages and cities. Did you ever witness
any of the terrorism in Vietnam? I never actually
witnessed it, but I've been close to it. The Viet
Cong used a lot of their, this regiment I mentioned
and its battalions, used a lot of their time.
That's why they wanted to survive, because that
was their main function. They'd go into villages
and terrorize them at night, and the purpose was
not only the retribution against the leaders, but
to keep the people uncertain about our side. They
established
the example, well, those guys can't protect you,
really. Right.
One of the things about the American military was
one of the criticisms made even by some of the
American military themselves was that there was a
lot of careerism among the officer corps in
Vietnam. Would you address that?
That is probably a justified criticism because I
personally never favored that. But it's
criticism against the policy, not necessarily
the individual. It was the basic policy, of
course, that we'd rotate each after a year of
service in Vietnam, officers and enlisted men.
Now there were exceptions. Volunteer to stay and
others were told to stay, like I was asked to stay.
And under those circumstances you volunteer.
And it was generally the practice that officers in
command, colonels and below, would be six months,
approximately six months in command. And to me,
that was a mistake. It made some sense to rotate the
captains commanding companies that frequently
considering they're going to be there one year
because of the greater exposure and the greater
stress on captains at company level. I'm talking
about infantry captains and cavalry captains.
But it just didn't make any sense at all to me. I
didn't think it was fair to the units of the men to
have a a commander move in every six months and
start over. I thought they should be there their
full year. And
there's a lot to be said for leaving the captains
too because really if the troopers are going to be
there a year, the captain ought to be there a year on
that basis.
There's a lot to be said for leaving them all there
for a year. Okay. That was a practice, but I never
agreed with the six-month rotation for in
command. Another, of course, of the big issues was
how the press, the dealings between the military
and the press, and many a charge that the press
spectacularized the war. Did you have any
relations or dealings with the press? I sure did.
In fact, this disturbed me a great deal. And I guess
we naturally make the comparisons with the press
coverage in World War II, where, first of all,
there was censorship. And there's a lot to be said
to justify censorship. And I think if we ever get
into- World War II. And World War II. And if we ever
get into another conflict, I think we ought to very
seriously consider putting it on. Because you can
just look at the Vietnam War, perspective of time
and focus on the press coverage and you can see the
influence the comfort to the enemy the influence
for the toward deterioration of troop morale and
citizen support for that war but anyway that's
true about sensationalizing and another feature
of World War II you'd expect to have a
correspondent with you and he'd stay with you for
months and months and months the division I'm
talking about. And he became known to the men and he
knew them and he would understand what that
division was doing and accomplishing and so
forth. It was quite different in Vietnam. We had
one man that stayed with us
over six months. And he was representing some
little outfit that, of course, he never got many of
the headlines in the big papers or on television.
And that's why none of them would want to come and
stay with us. But when they'd get a rumor of a big
operation, they'd start showing up. Of course, we
were obligated to give them transportation.
Usually it's air transportation in our outfit. So
you had to take them with you onto the battlefield?
Oh, yes. Or if you got into a big fight and there was a
lot of smoke and fire and blood and casualties,
boy, they'd come pouring in. And where they wanted
to be, was where the fire and smoke and blood was.
Because that's the way they'd get time on TV and a
byline in the press. And I guess you can't blame the
individual. He's competing. But the thing that
upset me was that there was no one, no one in
prominence, in the media, representing the
media, who was in any way really tying together the
actions we were in or that our corps was in or that
all the effort in Vietnam was involved in. What it
really amounted to in many ways was that our people
back home were fed news-wise primarily horror and
disasters and failures and that just doesn't make
any sense. Did your commanders or Westmoreland,
did they have any comments on this? I'm sure they
did. I have personally, I've discussed this with
many of the people.
What's the team?
Kovacs, somebody in Kovacs in the Washington
Post? That's his name. Anyway, people like him and
the Allsop, Stuart Allsop, and I could name others
if I could just be nimble enough to think, would
come over about once every six months and
refurbish their expertise so they could go back
home and write critical articles. I'd often ask
them why their or their press
service or their TV network didn't send somebody
to try to get a picture of this whole war and they'd
always say you can't get on the nightly news with
that kind of stuff you can't get on the front page of
that kind of stuff what does that say about
American society It says to me that our free press
in time of war has to be controlled on the battle
area. There's no doubt in my mind. Now, I'm not
saying don't report the smoke and fire and blood,
but I'm saying report it all. Somehow, get full
information to the people. I don't mean full
detail, but full perspective. And if you can't get
that, I think under any circumstances, you've got
to have censorship not to primarily to see that our
people back home aren't influenced improperly,
but primarily to deny the enemy the benefit of the
kind of reporting that occurred in Vietnam. It's
just not a fair thing to do. to our troops. Speaking
of your troops, what about the quality? You said a
little bit earlier that you wanted to talk about
the quality of the enlisted men and the soldiers
under your command and their morale. Would you
address that? You bet. Now, keep in mind that we
were, in a way, a special outfit. We had been formed
and trained, organized and trained to be a test
division with a brand new concept. And it turned
out to be a dramatic thing. Most of those men who
trained with us came overseas with us. They were
very well trained. Even though a lot of them were
draftees, because you see, they would have been
brought into the division and still had at least a
year to do. If they did still have a year to do, they
went with us. So that's why I say most of the men who
came over with us. The average age of these
troopers was down in the low 20s. Some of our senior
non-coms were, of course, past 30. And most of our
officers were 40 or under, of course. But we had
trained them. And
I was very proud of them. I thought that they were
just as splendid soldiers. I never saw in World War
II.
I wouldn't say that,
I would say that the courage and the capabilities
of our soldier in Vietnam would match the first
year in World War II. Now I say the first year in
World War II because in World War II there was no
rotation. Everybody became better and better and
almost automatic. It didn't become a casualty to
build that unit. And there were cheerful
soldiers. Then in Vietnam, at the end of the first
year Of course, by the end of the first year, we'd
lost a number of casualties, and also those who
remained were eligible to go home. Some
volunteered to remain. But practically all the
old team, so to speak, left on rotation and were
replaced. I think it was my good fortune that I
remained for another six months. And one of the
reasons, of course, was the one general officer
who could remain and see this transition and
training of the new people, because General
Kennard had a big job to come back to. And
the replacements were mostly young people, and I
thought they were, you couldn't have asked for
better replacements. You have the natural
problem of getting everybody back up into good
teamwork and training. We were engaging units of
divisions,
extremely tough operations in many cases, and
they just measured up splendidly. It hurts me to
hear the Vietnamese veteran or the soldier in
Vietnam criticized and blasphemed and really I
just can't believe that after I'd been there a year
that things fell apart and became so different.
Because the same kind of people were there for the
next year and a half. Same kind of people. I think
we've done a great disservice because We all
became so unhappy with that war that we let that
unhappiness reflect on the troops that were
fighting that war. Now, I wasn't there to see that
the dope problem became so big. I think we've had a
lot of talk about the grenading by the soldiers of
their sergeants or their officers. I just don't
know the statistics on that. But I'd bet my last
dollar that they were magnified beyond the true
dimensions by quite a lot. We knew when our
division settled into the base at On Kay, we
immediately knew through our CID agents that
heroin, for example, was being made available
right there in that It was coming in from outside.
The opportunities were there. I'm sure all forms
of dope. And we just, our commander told that
leadership of that community, if this becomes a
problem, these troops will never be allowed in
your city. And by golly, I think they very
effectively got a hold of it. in the Army has the
capability to keep up with these things pretty
well. We kept up with it, I think, quite well. You
didn't have a drug problem. We didn't have a drug
problem that we were aware of. Apparently
marijuana became more significant as time went
on. We were not aware of a problem, and I believe we
would have been. The division commander has too
many sources that are looking out for these things
for him, for him to go through a period of that much
time in ignorance on it.
I'm referring to my division commander. I
commanded that division for a month
on a temporary occasion when the commander was out
of the country, but I'm referring to our assigned
division commander. I don't believe that
the drug problem
ever caused us to lose casualties significantly.
It just never came to our attention.
How about the problems of the guerrilla warfare
versus the problems of a linear war, World War II,
conventional war? Did you adapt very well to those
problems? Who's the enemy, for example? Things
that lead to my lies. Yeah. Me lie was, some would
say it was an aberration. It was really
unquestionably a
deliberate event. It was a... clearly an atrocity
of war.
Incidentally, you mentioned that, so I'll say a
few things about it. I was not there. No, of course
not. It was in a division commanded by a good friend
of mine, by the way. Who's that? John Sam Costner,
contemporary and a good friend of mine. I was chief
related liaison when Eli happened and And I got the
first letter from this young fella riding Uber,
who wrote the letter to the Chief of Staff of the
Army, Secretary of Defense, and Chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee, in which he, as I
recall, it was over two pages typewritten, in
which he passed on what a friend of his, a friend who
had had been his friend in training in the States,
and they went to separate units in Vietnam and then
met over there. And this friend told him about that
incident. And this young fellow, Ridenhoover, I
think his name was, felt his conscience demanded
that he inform the authorities on it. And the first
letter received was by the chairman of the House
Armed Services Committee.
Representative Mendel Rivers.
And he looked at it and he said, get this over to the
back of the Army Legislative Liaison. I read it and
I couldn't believe it, but I had the same reaction.
I better get this to the chief of staff. And I had it
in there in a matter of minutes. And they looked at
it, he looked at it, and he said, well, we've got to,
we've got to, look at this and quickly, and he
assigned the Inspector General to look into it,
and within a matter of days, he established that
there was enough fact there that it had to be
investigated in detail. And then, of course, this
whole investigation process started.
And I will comment that after it was all over, there
were so many people defending
Lieutenant Calley From what I had learned, and I
learned subsequently, I was in part in error. From
what I'd learned about this whole process, and I
was very closely, of course, concerned with this
investigation and abreast of it because of the
Congress's interest, that as far as that incident
was concerned, Calley was the
commander-in-chief because he was the officer in
charge, and this piece of ground, there wasn't
anybody else I subsequently learned that his
commander knew about what Calley had done.
Medina? Medina. Captain Medina. But he was tried
and found innocent of it. But the fact is, I'm told,
by good authority, that he did know about it and
that he knew about it when it happened. So under
those circumstances, I felt that Calley wasn't
the fall guy for anybody. It was his initiative. He
was the only one there to control this thing, and he
did it. And he personally killed a lot of those
people.
And my view of it is, and I think most people in the
Army felt, it's absolutely inexcusable
behavior, unacceptable, no matter what the
circumstances. And the American people will
never support an army that uses its capabilities
in such a fashion, even on a small scale. It's just
un-American, it's inhuman, it's against the
rules of war and everything else. Anyway,
I'm getting way off the subject here. No, I want
your ideas. What was our general approach here
that I'm diverting from? guerrilla war, the
problems of guerrilla war. Of course, this is one
of them. Did you know of any situations under your
command that were similar to this in which you went
into a village and mistook? We had one atrocity
that was a crime, at least, that I was aware of. And
again, here's the case of a soldier that had direct
knowledge. His conscience told him he had to
report it. One of our patrols of five men
was ordered to leave at night and go patrol a
certain area, going on a three-day patrol, and led
by a sergeant. And they left early one evening and
were to be gone three days. And they were out on a
really a reconnaissance to try to see what the
enemy was doing in a certain area, quite an area's
distance away. That'd be dangerous. It is. But on
their way out of this village, taking off on this
thing, they kidnapped a young girl and took her
with them for their pleasure. And after the second
day, as I recall, Consciences began to bother and
some rumbling apparently. And the girl was
getting in bad shape. And so one of the men murdered
her, killed her, and left her there.
That's the worst that I know of. And I consider that
to be an aberration. Here's a case where a
non-commissioned officer just
had developed a disrespect for these people it had
to be that way and so we'll just take one of these
gooks with us you know and of course proper justice
was done what happened to these they were tried and
well there was one man who didn't participate or
two one or two who did not participate but the
others were court-martialed and given very
report this incident to the division commander of
that Vietnamese division I cited a moment ago,
because we felt he should know that we knew and that
justice would be done. He didn't know, but we felt
that he might have learned it some other way. But in
any case, he should be informed. But the guerrilla
warfare aspect was mainly a disruptor of the civil
populace and of the South Vietnamese of small
governing units, basically. They'd come into
these little district headquarters and try to
disrupt things, raise cane, kill government
employees, and so forth. In a way, you can look at
the whole North Vietnamese and Viet Cong
operation as a guerrilla operation because, but I
might add,
we didn't have a great deal of contact with that
kind of guerrilla. And therefore, as I've said, we
were dealing mainly with uniformed soldiers, so
identifying anyone wasn't too difficult. But we
went over there with a very simple set of five rules
of engagement that were designed to not shoot
innocent people and not shoot up innocent
villages. or to kill innocent people, but to
protect our troops. And they were applied really,
tried to, we just leaned over backwards not to hurt
innocent people. And I'm sure in some cases it cost
us some casualties, but we felt we had to be
conservative on that because it would have been
too bad to ever let it get out of hand, you know. You
just don't shoot on fear. But I said the whole
thing, in a sense, could be looked upon as
guerrilla operation because these North
Vietnamese divisions we were fighting basically
were hanging over borders to fight us. For
example,
some of our toughest fights were over on the
Vietnamese-Cambodian border.
The enemy had his headquarters, his logistics
installations, his medical facilities, all of
his important support and command elements in the
sanctuary across the border. And they'd
infiltrate to put supplies and ammunition and so
forth forward for a period of operations. and then
infiltrate the troops and then get them together
and then have it us. Well, we would defeat them. But
you could kill every one of those men and you
haven't destroyed that division because the
things that make it build, train, and fight are
still back there. And in that sense, the whole
thing was, in a sense, a guerrilla operation.
This is when it course we wanted the worst way in our
division with the capabilities we had to be
permitted to go across that border between South
Vietnam and Laos and South Vietnam and Cambodia
and it's just something that was never even the
good soldiers you know Westmoreland and all of
them just said
that's not
our guidance is we're not going to do that so just
forget it But we felt we could stop that Ho Chi Minh
Trail with our command and support echelons in
South Vietnam with our operating combat troops
going into Laos and Cambodia. And with our
capability, we could flit around here and there
and not ever become pinned down where they could
concentrate mass against us. I might tell you one
instance there. It was during a period that I was in
command of the division and we were operating with
a brigade over on the Cambodian, very near the
Cambodian border, right on the border as a matter
of fact. And
the other brigades were back over to the east.
One of our battalions, This is one of the tragedies
of our experience. Lost an entire platoon, less a
squad that had left and moved separately to an
ambush. This means we lost three squads of men, the
artillery observer party with them. It was a total
of 30 some odd men, 20 high.